# Project Overview

One of biggest questions in the energy transition right now is how much it is going to cost to integrate renewable energy into grid systems. In this project, I tackle this question by building and comparing several ML models that predict the cost of renewable energy grid integration as a function of VRE (Variable Renewable Energy) %. The file "integration_cost_model.ipynb" contains these models as well as data cleaning code, exploratory data analysis, and a declaration of which model is the most optimal. To run "integration_cost_model.ipynb", you will need to download all the csv files from the "integration_cost_model_data" folder. Note that "Nature_DATA_analysis.xlsx", though, is not needed to run "integration_cost_model.ipynb"; this is the Excel file I used to create the csv files.

The second part of this project focuses on gaining a better and more holistic understanding of what may affect integration costs in practice. The ML model may link VRE penetration to integration costs, but it is also important to check (1) whether vertically integrated markets tend to have higher or lower retail electricity prices than deregulated markets, (2) what the difference between wholesale and retail prices tends to be depending on region, and (3) whether retail electricity prices are correlated with wholesale electricity prices.

To answer (1), (2), and (3), I first gathered and manipulated the data I would need. To obtain a nice, clean retail electricity price dataset to work with (retail_prices.csv), I cleaned and manipulated "Average_retail_price_of_electricity.xlsx". To obtain a nice, clean wholesale electricity price dataset to work with, I downloaded wholesale electricity price data for the years 2001-2025 from https://www.eia.gov/electricity/wholesale/ and then created "excel_cleaner.py" to automate the process of cleaning all these files and combining them into a single file. To obtain a nice, clean dataset that listed the associated wholesale prices for different retail prices, I combined "retail_prices.csv" and the "wholesale_prices.csv" file that gets created as a result of running "excel_cleaner.py".

Finally, I developed Dashboard 1 (https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/richard.o.keefe3457/viz/Retail_Electricity_Rates_17764762581990/Dashboard1) to answer (1), Dashboard 2 (https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/richard.o.keefe3457/viz/Retail_vs_Wholesale_Prices_17764765198920/Dashboard1) to answer (2), and "correlation.py" to answer (3). As shown in Dashboard 1, retail prices in deregulated markets have, on average, consistently been higher than retail rates in vertically integrated markets over the years, and this trend stays consistent regardless of sector. Also as shown in Dashboard 1, retail prices across both markets and across all sectors have, on average, steadily been climbing over the years. I didn't include the transportation sector because a large portion of the data on this sector included missing values and values of $0. I suspected that the values of $0 were data recording errors. As shown in Dashboard 2, the differences between retail and wholesale prices have, on average, been climbing over the years for the regions PJM, ISONE, and especially CAISO, but have been staying relatively stable for the regions MISO and ERCOT. Worth noting though is that MISO and ERCOT also have less data. As for (3), it appears that retail rates are uncorrelated with wholesale electricity prices since as per "correlation.py", the R2 between retail and wholesale prices was only 0.09.
